[DOC-513] [2024.2] K8s common load balancer service (#24938)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/v2024.2/yugabyte-platform/create-deployments/create-universe-multi-zone-kubernetes.md

   ```

After the service YAML is applied, in this example you would access the universe at `yb-k8s-common-tserver.yb-prod-yb-k8s.svc.cluster.local`.

### Create a common load balancer service for YB-Masters/YB-TServers

> In versions v2.17 and later, newly created multi-zone universes are deployed in a single namespace by default. This can lead to duplication of load balancer services as a separate load balancer is created for each zone. In order to prevent creating extra load balancers, YBA provides the option to create a common load balancer service (currently {{<tags/feature/ea>}}) for YB-Masters and YB-TServers that spans across all the zones in a namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In v2.17 and later, newly created multi-zone universes are deployed in a single namespace by default. This can lead to duplication of load balancer services as a separate load balancer is created for each zone. To prevent creating extra load balancers, you can create a common load balancer service (currently {{<tags/feature/ea>}}) for YB-Masters and YB-TServers that spans all the zones in a namespace.
```

For scenarios involving multi-namespaces or clusters, a distinct service is created for each namespace, maintaining the flexibility needed for complex deployments while avoiding unnecessary resource allocation.

#### Enable the common load balancer

> By default, the load balancer service is created per zone, and you can change this behavior by [configuring helm overrides](#configure-helm-overrides) during universe creation, or by enabling a global runtime configuration option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the load balancer service is created per zone. You can change this behavior by [configuring Helm overrides](#configure-helm-overrides) during universe creation, or by enabling a global runtime configuration option.
```

> You can explicitly define the service scope with the values as "AZ" or "Namespaced" when you [configure helm overrides](#configure-helm-overrides) as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can explicitly define the service scope with the values as "AZ" or "Namespaced" when you [configure Helm overrides](#configure-helm-overrides) as follows:
```

```yaml
serviceEndpoints:
  - name: "yb-master-ui"
    type: LoadBalancer
    # Can be AZ/Namespaced
    scope: "AZ"
    annotations: {}
    clusterIP: ""
    ## Sets the Service's externalTrafficPolicy
    externalTrafficPolicy: ""
    app: "yb-master"
    loadBalancerIP: ""
    ports:
      http-ui: "7000"

  - name: "yb-tserver-service"
    type: LoadBalancer
    # Can be AZ/Namespaced
    scope: "AZ"
    annotations: {}
    clusterIP: ""
    ## Sets the Service's externalTrafficPolicy
    externalTrafficPolicy: ""
    app: "yb-tserver"
    loadBalancerIP: ""
    ports:
      tcp-yql-port: "9042"
      tcp-yedis-port: "6379"
      tcp-ysql-port: "5433"
```

> For services without an explicitly defined scope in helm overrides, the default service scope (Namespaced) is used, provided you set the **Default service scope for K8s universe** Global runtime configuration option (config key `yb.universe.default_service_scope_for_k8s`) to true. The configuration flag defines the default service scope for the universe if the scope is not explicitly defined in the service overrides.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For services without an explicitly defined scope in Helm overrides, the default service scope (Namespaced) is used, provided you set the **Default service scope for K8s universe** Global runtime configuration option (config key `yb.universe.default_service_scope_for_k8s`) to true. The configuration flag defines the default service scope for the universe if the scope is not explicitly defined in the service overrides.
```

> Refer to [Manage runtime configuration settings](../../administer-yugabyte-platform/manage-runtime-config/). Note that only a Super Admin user can modify Global runtime configuration settings, and you cannot modify this service scope during a universe creation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to [Manage runtime configuration settings](../../administer-yugabyte-platform/manage-runtime-config/). Note that only a Super Admin user can modify Global runtime configuration settings, and you cannot modify this service scope during universe creation.
```

> {{<tip title="Important considerations">}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keep in mind the following:
```

- Scope Utilization: Services with a defined scope will adhere to that scope, as long as it's supported.

> - Namespaced scope: For Namespace scoped services, a service lifecycle is tied to the lifecycle of the universe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Namespaced scope: For Namespaced-scoped services, a service lifecycle is tied to the lifecycle of the universe.
```

> - Namespace deletion: When a namespace is deleted, all services associated with that namespace that were created by Helm will be removed as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Namespace deletion: When a namespace is deleted, all services associated with that namespace that were created by Helm are removed as well.
```

- Service configuration changes: Existing services can have their serviceType, ports, and annotations updated.

> {{</tip>}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

#### Migrating service type from AZ to Namespaced scope

> After creating a service scope, it cannot be changed directly. To migrate a service from an AZ scope to a Namespaced scope, do the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After creating a service scope, you can't change it directly. To migrate a service from an AZ scope to a Namespaced scope, do the following:
```

> 1. Create a new service: Use Helm overrides to add a new service with the desired namespaced scope.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a new service: Use Helm overrides to add a new service with the desired Namespaced scope.
```

> 1. Migrate clients. Gradually switch clients over to the new namespaced service to ensure they function correctly without disrupting operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Migrate clients. Gradually switch clients over to the new Namespaced service to ensure they function correctly without disrupting operations.
```

1. Remove the old Service. After confirming that all clients are using the new service, update the Helm overrides again to remove the old AZ scoped service.

#### Limitations

> - Unsupported in YugabyteDB helm chart versions before `2024.2`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Unsupported in YugabyteDB Helm chart versions before v2024.2.
```

> - Unsupported for upgrading universes created prior to versions `2.18.6.0` and `2.20.2.0`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Unsupported for upgrading universes created prior to v2.18.6.0 and v2.20.2.0.
```

- Enable exposing service is disabled.

### Examples

> To create a universe with "Namespaced" scope services by default, do the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a universe with Namespaced scope services by default, do the following:
```

1. Set the **Default service scope for K8s universe** Global runtime configuration option (config key `yb.universe.default_service_scope_for_k8s`) to true.

> 1. When you [configure helm overrides](#configure-helm-overrides), use serviceEndpoint overrides without explicitly defining scope or define scope as "Namespaced":

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. When you [configure Helm overrides](#configure-helm-overrides), use serviceEndpoint overrides without explicitly defining scope, or define scope as "Namespaced":
```

    ```yaml
    serviceEndpoints:
      - name: "yb-master-ui"
        type: LoadBalancer
        annotations: {}
        clusterIP: ""
        ## Sets the Service's externalTrafficPolicy
        externalTrafficPolicy: ""
        app: "yb-master"
        loadBalancerIP: ""
        ports:
          http-ui: "7000"
    ```

> Note that irrespective of the default scope, you can add any scope to the services using helm overrides, provided that the database version supports the scope.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that irrespective of the default scope, you can add any scope to the services using Helm overrides, provided that the database version supports the scope.
```
